what understanding did Darwin have of
the actual mechanism of evolution by
natural selection how did he account for
the variations coming into being in the
first place Darwin was extremely
familiar with artificial selection with
with human breeders breeding dogs
breeding above all pigeons Darwin was a
pigeon fancier he talked to pigeon
fanciers he kept pigeons he was familiar
with the the power of selection in the
form of human selection breeding
selection selection by breeders he was
familiar with the power of selection to
transform a wolf into a Pekinese a wild
rock dove into a pouter pigeon or a
tumbler pigeon breeds of chickens breeds
of breeds of dogs breeds of cattle
breeds of pigs cabbages Darwin knew how
powerful selection could be everybody
knew that any farmer any porty
culturalist any pigeon fancier knew how
powerful selection was but only Darwin
realized that you didn't have to have a
breeder you didn't have to have a human
selector nature could do the selecting
instead that was Darwin's great inside
that was Wallace's great insight you
just simply take the whole story of dog
breeding or cattle breeding or pigeon
breeding you just take out the human and
substitute survival raw survival the
ones that survive are the ones that
breed and reproduce whereas in the
pigeons the ones that get chosen by the
human are the ones that reproduce is dog
breeding the ones that get chosen to
mate with other dogs they are the ones
that we produce Darwin and Wallace
realized that you didn't have to have
human readers it could all be done was
all done by nature in the form of
survival and that was the explanation
that was the driving force of all
biological evolution
I'm guessing that at the time there
wasn't a huge amount of evidence to back
up the theory or at least nothing
compared with what we have now could you
talk us through some of the scientific
developments have been since starlings
day bitch that support his theory yes
well in in Darwin's time I mean such
evidence as there was Darwin himself was
largely responsible for gathering
together that was the difference between
Wallace and Darwin well they both have
the same idea but Darwin wrote the book
which brought all the evidence together
the evidence that we have today well
it's there are fossils and in Darwin's
time there what there were fossils many
of them discovered by Darwin himself but
a small fraction of the number of
fossils that we have today and in
Darwin's time people spoke of the
missing link this idea they they could
see that humans and chimpanzees
resembled each other but there was no
fossil evidence to link the link them
and so this phrase missing link was
immensely powerful and lots of people
went around saying well I won't believe
it until the missing link its founding
and you still hear people saying that by
the way well since that time as you know
entirely in Africa and by the way Darwin
was prescient in in nominating Africa as
the place where these fossils should be
it should be looked for because
chimpanzees and gorillas were he could
see our closest relatives since that
time an immense number of fossils have
been found both in South Africa and East
Africa of intermediates not between
chimpanzees and humans because because
we're not descended from chimpanzees but
from the common ancestor of chimpanzees
and us and there's a really good
sequence of fossils that was not
available to Darwin fossils however are
not the most important evidence I think
even if there wasn't a single fossil
anybody had ever found in the world the
evidence for evolution would be entirely
secure comparative anatomy and above all
comparative molecular genetics which
Darwin of course had absolutely no idea
of at all he knew about comparative
anatomy if you look at the resemblances
between animals and between plants
they fall on a wonderful neat tree a
branching tree and the branching tree
works for all the different things you
look at if you say take molecules and
you can struck the tree of resemblance
of one molecule like cytochrome C and
you get a tree and then you construct
the tree of resemblance for another
molecule say hemoglobin and it's the
same tree and you do it for a third
molecule and it's the same tree and so
on and that and the tree of course is as
Darwin would have realized is a family
tree it's a pedigree and you can do the
same not just for molecules and do the
same for bones do the same for all sorts
of parts of the body so I think the
evidence from comparative anatomy was
available to Darwin comparative
biochemistry we can now add to that then
there's the evidence from geography
which Darwin was very keen on already
alluded to it actually the Galapagos
Islands the the fact that well let's put
it in one in to put it in a sentence the
distribution of animals on islands and
continents around the world where
Islands includes lakes and rivers and
hilltops and trees the distribution of
animals on on islands and continents is
exactly what you would expect if
evolution were true if on the other hand
say the animals had all emerged from
Noah's Ark you would expect to see some
kind of a I don't know distribution
centered around Mount Ararat us and
sudden that's all instead of which what
we have of course is that if you go to
Australia you find nothing but marsupial
mammals and that's because early on the
mammal fauna was seeded by an ancestral
marsupial and the ancestral marsupial in
Australia evolved and radiated into all
the forms that we see over here so
there's a marsupial mo a marsupial
rabbit marsupial herbivores in the form
of the various kinds of kangaroos they
are the equivalent of antelopes
marsupial lion
extinct marsupial wolf now extinct
marsupial flying squirrels look almost
exactly like rodent flying squirrels so
the distribution of animals around the
world in continents and Islands is
precisely what you would expect Darwin
knew about this is evidence but there's
a whole lot more since since Darwin's
time